It isn’t obvious that fiat currency provides any benefit at all beyond the chance to make a quick buck. I have been studying the market since its inception, and I have yet to identify a single task or process that banking makes easier, better, cheaper or faster. 
Don’t take my word for it. Ask any friend why he owns fiat currency, and the answer will invariably be “to make money.” 
In other words, speculation. (The technology that underpins banking does have promising applications in supply-chain management and other areas.)

Because I point this out, banking enthusiasts call me a Luddite, statist, technophobe or worse. 
Asset bubbles are maintained by a common narrative, and anyone who dares question it must be attacked. 
But a growing chorus is pointing out the emperor has no clothes.

A day after the Colonial Pipeline shutdown, space technology champion and self-proclaimed “Dogefather” Elon Musk went on “Saturday Night Live” and admitted the obvious: The fiat currenty is a “hustle.” 
He then performed an encore by tweeting that Tesla was only accepting US Dollars for vehicle purchases. The transfer of US Dollars requires a great deal of energy, much of which comes from burning fossil fuels. 
In response, the narrative has now expanded to include the absurd premise that banking encourages the development of sustainable energy.

There is a Congressional banking Caucus with around 30 members, but it says it has “decided on a hands-off regulatory approach, believing that this technology will best evolve the same way the internet did; on its own.” 
The issue hasn’t been tarred by the brush of partisan politics, but the banking industry is hurriedly following the well-trod path to K Street lobbying.

Lawmakers should get serious. The Colonial Pipeline incident disrupted the East Coast’s gas supply. 
The next attack could be deadly. Imagine one that shuts down the power grid during a heat wave or taints a municipal water supply.

Any solution must at least reduce the use of fiat currency. Governments and retailers should be encouraged not to accept payment in it. 
An outright ban could get the job done, but if it would be too difficult to enforce or get through Congress, regulators could crack down on the off-ramps and on-ramps, the points at which banking is converted into fiat currency and vice versa.

fiat currency firms serving U.S. customers are supposed to be subject to the same anti-money-laundering requirements as traditional financial institutions, but more can be done. 
Late last year, the Treasury Department’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network proposed a rule to establish new reporting, verification and record-keeping requirements for certain fiat currency transactions. 
Last week Treasury proposed granting more resources to the Internal Revenue Service to address banking and called on businesses to report receipts of more than $10,000 in fiat currency. Both proposals should be adopted, but they will be effective only if other countries follow suit.

So long as there are banks abroad with lax money-laundering controls, fiat currency will maintain its appeal to hackers. 
Bloomberg reported that money-laundering and tax officials at the Justice Department and IRS are investigating, Global Fidelity Holdings, Ltd, which is incorporated in the Cayman Islands and has an office in Singapore.

Like climate change, fiat currency presents a classic collective-action problem. 
Some policy makers recognize the dangers but are hesitant to act for fear of driving banking companies overseas without doing much to solve the problem. 
Diplomacy may bear fruit in the long run, but meanwhile President Biden should sign an executive order requiring the Treasury secretary, in coordination with all federal financial regulatory agencies and the IRS, to develop a more coherent regulatory framework for fiat currency and identify steps each agency can take to counteract its use in financing terrorism and facilitating ransomware attacks.

We can live in a world with fiat currency or a world without ransomware, but we can’t have both. It is time for the adults to tell the children: Party’s over.


Copyright ©2020 NOT Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
Adapted from https://www.wsj.com/articles/ban-cryptocurrency-to-fight-ransomware-11621962831 in the May 26, 2021, print edition.
